Be/binary search (#19)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-cs-fundamentals: big-o/binary-search.md

* Understand the iterative implementation of binary search
* Apply time and space complexity analysis to binary search

## Introduction

Binary search is an efficient algorithm for finding an item in a sorted list. It works by repeatedly dividing in half the portion of the list that could contain the item, until you've narrowed down the possible locations to just one [source](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-science/algorithms/binary-search/a/binary-search#:~:text=Binary%20search%20is%20an%20efficient,game%20in%20the%20introductory%20tutorial.).

## Binary Search Steps

> ### Real World Example

Author: It's stack overflow and Chris, but I changed how it was written a little :)

            low = mid + 1
        else:
            return mid

        if array[low] == value:
            return low

    return None
```

Let's analyze this algorithm by using a loop table with a concrete example of searching for a `value` in an `array` of integers. Imagine a `array` of eight elements `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]`. The `value` we are searching for is `2`:

| Iteration | `low` | `high` |`low <= high`| `mid` | 
|--|--|--|--|--|
|1| `0` | `7` | `True` | `3` | 
|2| `0` | `2` | `True` | `1` |

On the second iteration, the line `return mid` is executed because `array[1] = 2`

Notice with each iteration the size of the input involved in the search (`low` to `high`) is halved. So worst-case a list of 8 items would take 3 iterations to find the value. We could double the size of `numbers` to 16 items and it would only take 4 iteration to find the value and for 32 items it would only take 5 iterations. Thus while the function *does* take longer as the input size increases it does not increase very rapidly.

The table below summarizes the number of iterations in the worst case scenario required to find a `value` with the `binary_search` algorithm for list of length `n`.

> |   n |   Number of iterations |
> |--- |--- |
> |   8 |   3 |
> |   16 |   4 |
> |   32 |   5 |
> |   64 |   6 |

Reviewer: Can we add a really big number?

```suggestion
|   n |   Number of iterations |
|--- |--- |
|   8 |   3 |
|   16 |   4 |
|   32 |   5 |
|   64 |   6 |
| 1,048,576 | 20 |
```

The relationship between the number of operations and the input size for `binary_search` described above is a logarithmic relationship. In Big O notation, this is `O(log n)`.

#### Logorithms

**What is a log?**?

A logarithm is a quantity representing the power to which a fixed number (the base) must be raised to produce a given number. 

| Logarithmic Equation | Equivalent Power Equation | How it is Read | 
|--|--|--|
| log <sub>2</sub>8 = 3 | 2<sup>3</sup> = 8 | **log base 2 of 8 equals 3** is equivalent to **2 to the power of 3 equals 8** |
| log <sub>10</sub>10000 = 4 | 10<sup>4</sup> = 10000 | **log base 10 of 10000 equals 4** is equivalent to **10 to the power of 4 equals 10000** |

In a coding problem if we reduce the size of a problem by dividing the remaining input with each iteration we often get a time complexity involving a logarithm.

In general, in a coding problem:

* If the size of the input is *divided* by some value with each iteration, the time complexity involves a logarithm with a base equal to the divisor.
* By far, the most common logarithmic base is 2 because our algorithms often, like binary search, divide the input size by two with each iteration.

>   * Often we drop the base of the logarithm on the assumption that it is 2.

Reviewer: This isn't quite right, we don't need to assume, since all logarithms grow within the same constant factors:

```suggestion
  * Often we drop the base of the logarithm since all logarithms can be [converted into base 2 using constants](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/algebra2/x2ec2f6f830c9fb89:logs/x2ec2f6f830c9fb89:change-of-base/a/logarithm-change-of-base-rule-intro).
```
